Hello and welcome back to the course and Tablo.
In today's tutorial, we will learn how to work with Time series data.
But first things first, let's go ahead and save a workbook.
We've already connected the datasource and saving a workbook will prevent from loss of any progress
that we make along the way in this section.
So let's click save as and give our name.
In this case, it will be section three for me.
Click save and now it's saved.
And all we have to do when we make changes is just press control on the keyboard and that will save
our progress.
All right.
So now we're trying to visualize typesetters.
Let's have a look at our data first and understand what we're working with.
So if we're right, click on the datasource, click Udara.
Um, you'll see that, as we discussed, we've got age, gender.
So two categories then we've got period and we've got an unemployment value for each row.
And that's exactly what we want to visualize.
We want to see how unemployment is changing as period changes.
So we scroll down, we can see that we have many months, we've got a month for every single year or
we've got twelve months for every single year.
And we can see how unemployment is changing.
So we want to visualize that.
So let's go ahead and do that.
What are we going to do is which is going to double click on unemployed and then we're going to double
click on period?
And you see how Tableau is very smart there, it's automatically put unemployed into rows and it's summed
it up and it's put year or is put period into columns and it's taken the year of the period.
So what's going on here is there's some aggregation and we'll talk about aggregation more in the next
Atauro.
But it kind of makes sense already.
What is happening is Tableau is taking all of the data that it can see, say, for 2007 and and it's
setting it up.
All of the values in all of the rows that have twenty seven in them, irrespective of month of gender,
of age, is just summing up and coming up of one single value for 2007, then the same thing for 2008,
2009 and so on.
So that all make sense.
But now we've kind of got a bit of a question here.
We know that our data has much is much more granular than that.
We know that we have Yero months in every year and we have information for that.
Where how do we get to that level of granularity?
Well, let's go ahead and explore that.
If we go to the, um, the dropdown here, which you can see for this dimension and we click it, you'll
see that there's two sections which are responsible for time.
There's this section which has your quarter, month, day, and then there's this section which also
has your month, week, number and day.
What's the difference between the two?
Well, two, to find that out, let's click on month in the first section.
And right away you can see how we no longer have years at the bottom.
Instead of that, we have.
Instead of that, we have months and what happened there?
Well, the other thing that we can also see is that we have only one January and only one February and
only one June.
We know that in our data we have many Jeunes and many Februaries.
We have one.
In fact, we have one for every single year.
But in this case, we were only presented with one of each month.
So we only have 12 points on this chart.
And what is going on?
Well, what is happening is Tablo is taking all of the data from our data source, which has, let's
say, for instance, May four in any role that has May in it, it will take it and aggregate it to this
value.
So it will add them up irrespective of age, gender and even year.
And for that, for us, that doesn't make any sense.
What's the point of adding up unemployment for 2005, 2006, 2007 and so on come out one number.
That number has no meaning to us as a why is that happening?
Well, the reason is, is because in this case, Tablo is recognizing, recognizing month as a dimension.
And how can we tell that?
Well, Tablo is giving us a hint up here.
You can see that month of period is being highlighted in blue.
So Tablo always highlights dimension's and blue and measures and green.
And so that tells us that Tableau is recognizing this new variable because in essence, it is a new
variable.
Our variable in the data source is called period.
We don't have a we don't have a variable that is called month, but tablas creating a calculation here
and you can double click on it and see what the formula is.
So Tablo is creating a calculation which is month of period.
And in essence, that's the new variable.
And Tablo is recognizing this new variable as a dimension.
And that means it will treat it just as it would treat age stories, just as it would treat gender or
in our case, age, because we have age groups.
But let's let's think of it as in gender.
So tabbouleh is treating this new variable as a categorical variable.
It only has 12 categories and it's putting the data into those categories.
Well, obviously, in this case, we don't want that.
We don't want different categories of months.
We actually want a timeline over here at the bottom.
So how do we get that?
Well, instead of this month, let's go ahead and select the second month over here in this dropdown.
And right away, you can see that our chart changed and also you can see that now.
Month of period is green, so this variable this time is being recognized as a measure.
So if it were a calculated variable, it would be sitting over here.
And what then happens now is that we have a timeline at the bottom and we have all of the months with
all of the data that we are looking for.
And this is exactly what we wanted.
So just to see the difference, let's click again and we'll select a year instead of month.
So here you can see a similar chart to what we had before.
So I'll just bring that one up here.
You can see very similar line, but here you've got categories of years.
But if we click this year at the bottom here, then here you've got these sort of categories of years.
You've got a timeline.
And only difference with the month timeline is that there's less dots on this timeline.
And in fact, you can see the dots if you in line, if you click on color and you select this option,
you'll actually see the dots here.
So you have less dots on this timeline.
And all we're doing by changing this level here is we're changing the granularity of this specific timeline.
So we just saying we want more dots on the timeline.
We're not changing the category that we're grouping our observations into.
We're changing the granularity of our timeline or the number of ticks on the timeline.
And if we change month, there we go.
So we're also once again, we're changing the granular granularity of our timeline.
So just changes back to normal.
And that's exactly what we want.
So you have to be careful of that.
And that's an important part of working part time series data that you need to understand what you want
from your time data, whether you want it to be a dimension or a category or whether you want it to
be a measure.
In this case, we wanted obviously to be a measure so we can plot a timeline like this.
And so that's pretty much it for today.
But before we go, what I wanted to do is I wanted to show you how you can validate this chart.
So this is unemployment data for the US and obviously it's publicly available.
So you can just go to Google and look for unemployment.
And the twenty seven weeks is long term unemployment.
We're looking at long term unemployment.
Twenty seven weeks and then just type in.
Fred, Fred Fred stands for Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
So if you go here, you'll see a very similar chart and well, here I can change it to 2005.
So you can see that looks a lot like our chart.
The only question we've got, we can just look at the tip here and see six thousand eight hundred.
And in our chart, it's seven thousand one hundred or seven million one hundred thousand.
So it's of course, you'll have a bit of a discrepancy if you have data from different data sources.
In this case, it's about three hundred thousand.
But the way like I look at it, if it's statistical data, so it's three hundred thousand and you divided
over six thousand eight hundred.
So that's less than five percent difference.
And for what we're doing for our purposes, that'll be sufficient level of precision.
And you can see that the charts are quite similar.
So we are working with actual unemployment data in the US for this period of time.
OK, so that's us for today.
And next time we will be talking about aggregation, granularity and level of detail.
So I'll look forward to seeing you in the next.
Litoria will be a very important one and until then, happy analyzing.